---
layout: post
title: Reconciling Geodetic Deformation Rates, Rock Uplift Rates, and River Incision Rates in Taiwan Using a 3-D Lithospheric Kinematic Model
date: 2024-12-05 14:10:00-0400
description: AGU Fall Meeting 2024 @Walter E. Washington Convention Center, poster No. EP23B-1326
categories: Conference
last_updated: 2024-12-06 10:45:12-0400
related_posts: false
giscus_comments: true
featured: true
toc:
  sidebar: left

---

<p style="text-indent: 0em;"><span style="font-size:14px;"><a href="https://evan-pc-chiang.github.io/">Ping-Chen Chiang</a><sup>1</sup>, <a href="https://earth.indiana.edu/directory/faculty/johnson-kaj.html">Kaj M. Johnson</a><sup>1</sup>, <a href="https://www.geomatics.ncku.edu.tw/english/member.php?id=23&tpl=6">Kuo-En Ching</a><sup>2</sup>, <a href="https://raychuang0.wixsite.com/ntugeog">Ray Y. Chuang</a><sup>3</sup>, <a href="https://earth.indiana.edu/directory/faculty/yanites-brian.html">Brian J. Yanites</a><sup>1</sup></span><br />
<span style="font-size:9px;">1: Department of Earth &amp; Atmospheric Science, Indiana University Bloomington, Indiana, USA.<br />
2: Department of Geomatics, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.<br />
3: Department of Geography, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.<br /></span></p>

## Big Picture

This study aims to examine deformation over the earthquake cycle and millennial times scale. We attempt to reconcile geodetic vertical velocities with geomorphic measurements of rock uplift and incision rates while estimating fault slip rates and interseismic locking using a 3-D lithospheric kinematic model and Monte Carlo Metropolis (MCMC) inversions. The model combines an elastic upper crust overlying an inviscid lower crust and mantle. Deformation in the model is driven by imposing slip rates on faults in the elastic crust. The inverted models are able to explain most of the observed geodetic horizontal shortening rates in the fold and thrust belt and across the longitudinal valley suture zone.

## Taiwan Geological Setting

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/post/3D_model/TW_setting.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Geological setting map from Ching et al., 2011
</div>


The Taiwan mountain belt results from an oblique convergence between the Luzon volcanic arc and the continental margin of the Eurasian plate. In northern Taiwan, the Philippine Sea plate subducts northward beneath the Eurasian plate along the Ryuku trench; south of Taiwan, by contrast, the Philippine Sea plate in the west overrides the crust of the South China Sea plate along the Manila trench. The maximum converge rate of these two plates is 82 mm/yr.


## Data

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/post/3D_model/data_used.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Different types of data we use in this study.
</div>

We use 1219 GPS stations (746 campaign & 415 cGPS) and 420 leveling data for shorterm data plus 372 long-term data, including incision rates and rock uplift rates, to constrain our inversion model. With the different periods of data sets, we can estimate the locking area in each fault segment.


## Fault Geometry
<script>
function resizeIframe(iframe) {
  iframe.style.height = iframe.contentWindow.document.body.scrollHeight + 'px';
  iframe.style.width = iframe.contentWindow.document.body.scrollWidth + 'px';
}
</script>
<div class="row mt-3" style="margin: 0">
<iframe id="depth-iframe" src="/assets/img/post/3D_model/depth.html" width="100%" style="border: 0px dashed grey;" onload="resizeIframe(this)"></iframe>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Interative plot of the 3D fault geometries we used in this project.
</div>

Above is an illustration of the 3-D lithospheric kinematic model in this study. Faults are embedded in a 30-km-thick elastic crustal plate overlying an inviscid mantle. Most of the faults acquire from Shyu et al. 2016 Taiwan Earthquake Model.  The hoping section (North CRF) acquires from Chen et al., 2020. Detachment from 5 km to 30 km acquires from Carena et al., 2002. We also extend the Okinawa trough, Ryukyu trench, and malila trench for couple thousand kilometers to make sure the total convergence rate is about 80 mm/yr.


## Forward Model & Inverse Method

We are trying to estimate three parameters in this inversion: Strike-slip (s), dip-slip (r), and locking depths (D) for each segment. In addition, we assume data errors (σ) are normal distributed and use this to determine the relative weighting of the data.

<div class="row mt-3" style="margin: 0">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/post/3D_model/concept.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

Above is an illustration of the analogous elastic plate flexure model in a 2-D, plane-strain case. The geometry of the fault and plate is shown in the lower panel, with a locked section of the fault indicated with a dashed line and an interseismic creeping fault indicated with solid lines. The upper panels show predicted long-term (solid lines) and interseismic (dashed) horizontal and vertical velocities normalized by the slip rate on the fault. Locking depth is indicated by variable D (Johnson et al., 2020). This figure indicates how slip rate (s, r) and locking depth (D) affect the surface velocity. We seek the posterior distribution of model parameters given data, p(s, r, D, σ\|d). Bayes’s theorem states that:

$$
p(s,r,D,\sigma|d)\varpropto p(d|s,r,D,\sigma)p(s,r,D,\sigma)
$$

We apply probabilistic inversion using Monte Carlo Metropolis sampling to estimate the above posterior distribution. Prior bounds on the sense of strike-slip and dip-slip rates are based on the geologic model by Shyu et al. 2016 (Taiwan earthquake model).

## Model Results

### Fitting Results

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/post/3D_model/result.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

Observed and predicted velocities. (a) Short-term horizontal rates comparison. Red arrow represent the model prediction and blue arrow represent the data. (b) Long-term vertical rates comparison. The background color represents the model prediction, and the data points represent long-term data. (c) Short-term vertical rates comparison. The background color represents the model prediction, and the data points represent short-term data. The red boundary indicates the area we not attempt to fit in our inversion due to the strong signal from over-pumped groundwater.

### Parameter Results

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/post/3D_model/result_2.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

Estimated slip rates shown on the fault surface traces. (a) Strike-slip rate. A positive value for strike-slip rate denotes right lateral movement, while a negative value denotes left lateral movement. (b) Dip-slip rate.  A positive value for dip-slip rate denotes reverse faulting, while a negative value denotes normal faulting. (c) Locking and slip-rates on the detachment. The colour represents the locking probability, and the arrow represents the slip rate.


<div class="row mt-3" style="margin: 0">
<iframe id="depth-iframe" src="/assets/img/post/3D_model/locking.html" width="100%" style="border: 0px dashed grey;" onload="resizeIframe(this)"></iframe>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Interative plot of the Locking probability from the model.
</div>

## Conclusion

1. We successfully reconcile geodetic deformation rates, rock uplift rates, and river incision rates in Taiwan using a 3-D lithospheric kinematic model. We explain 70% of the short-term horizontal and long-term vertical data.
2. The RMSE in the short-term vertical is higher due to the higher GPS uncertainties, but our model is able to capture the long-wavelength deformation signal.
3. Our results indicate that most of the fault locking, including the detachment, occurs above a depth of 12 km.
4. We provide insights into the distribution of slip rates on the faults and the locking depths in Taiwan, which can be used to improve seismic hazard assessments and geodynamic models.