---
layout: post
title: Reconciling Geodetic Deformation Rates, Rock Uplift Rates, and River Incision Rates in Taiwan Using a 3-D Lithospheric Kinematic Model
date: 2022-12-14 14:10:00-0400
description: AGU Fall Meeting 2022 @McCormick Place Convention Center, poster No. G35B-0323
categories: Conference
update: 2023-08-28  21:57:41-0400
related_posts: false
toc:
  sidebar: left
---
<p style="text-indent: 0em;"><span style="font-size:14px;"><a href="https://evan-pc-chiang.github.io/">Ping-Chen Chiang</a><sup>1</sup>, <a href="https://earth.indiana.edu/directory/faculty/johnson-kaj.html">Kaj M. Johnson</a><sup>1</sup>, <a href="https://www.geomatics.ncku.edu.tw/english/member.php?id=23&tpl=6">Kuo-En Ching</a><sup>2</sup>, <a href="https://raychuang0.wixsite.com/ntugeog">Ray Y. Chuang</a><sup>3</sup>, <a href="https://earth.indiana.edu/directory/faculty/yanites-brian.html">Brian J. Yanites</a><sup>1</sup></span><br />
<span style="font-size:9px;">1: Department of Earth &amp; Atmospheric Science, Indiana University Bloomington, Indiana, USA.<br />
2: Department of Geomatics, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.<br />
3: Department of Geography, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.<br /></span></p>


## Big Picture

This study aims to examine deformation over the earthquake cycle and millennial times scale. We attempt to reconcile geodetic vertical velocities with geomorphic measurements of rock uplift and incision rates while estimating fault slip rates and interseismic locking using a 3-D lithospheric kinematic model and Monte Carlo Metropolis (MCMC) inversions. The model combines an elastic upper crust overlying an inviscid lower crust and mantle. Deformation in the model is driven by imposing slip rates on faults in the elastic crust. The inverted models are able to explain most of the observed geodetic horizontal shortening rates in the fold and thrust belt and across the longitudinal valley suture zone.

## Taiwan Geological Setting
<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/TW_setting.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Geological setting map from Ching et al., 2011
</div>

The Taiwan mountain belt results from an oblique convergence between the Luzon volcanic arc and the continental margin of the Eurasian plate. In northern Taiwan, the Philippine Sea plate subducts northward beneath the Eurasian plate along the Ryuku trench; south of Taiwan, by contrast, the Philippine Sea plate in the west overrides the crust of the South China Sea plate along the Manila trench. The maximum converge rate of these two plates is 82 mm/yr.

## Data

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/data_used.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Different types of data we use in this study.
</div>

We use 1219 GPS stations (746 campaign & 415 cGPS) and 420 leveling data for shorterm data plus 372 long-term data, including incision rates and rock uplift rates, to constrain our inversion model. With the different periods of data sets, we can estimate the locking area in each fault segment.


## Fault Geometry
<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/fault.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

Above is an illustration of the 3-D lithospheric kinematic model in this study. Faults are embedded in a 40-km-thick elastic crustal plate overlying an inviscid mantle. Most of the faults acquire from Shyu et al. 2016 Taiwan Earthquake Model.  The hoping section (North CRF) acquires from Chen et al., 2020. Detachment from 5 km to 40 km acquires from Carena et al., 2002. We also extend the Okinawa trough, Ryukyu trench, and malila trench for couple thousand kilometers to make sure the total convergence rate is about 80 mm/yr.

## Inverse Method

We are trying to estimate three parameters in this inversion: Strike-slip (s), dip-slip (r), and locking depths (D) for each segment. In addition, we assume data errors (σ) are normal distributed and use this to determine the relative weighting of the data.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/model.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

Above is an illustration of the analogous elastic plate flexure model in a 2-D, plane-strain case. The geometry of the fault and plate is shown in the lower panel, with a locked section of the fault indicated with a dashed line and an interseismic creeping fault indicated with solid lines. The upper panels show predicted long-term (solid lines) and interseismic (dashed) horizontal and vertical velocities normalized by the slip rate on the fault. Locking depth is indicated by variable D (Johnson et al., 2020). This figure indicates how slip rate (s, r) and locking depth (D) affect the surface velocity. We seek the posterior distribution of model parameters given data, p(s, r, D, σ\|d). Bayes’s theorem states that:

$$
p(s,r,D,\sigma|d)\varpropto p(d|s,r,D,\sigma)p(s,r,D,\sigma)
$$

We apply probabilistic inversion using Monte Carlo Metropolis sampling to estimate the above posterior distribution. Prior bounds on the sense of strike-slip and dip-slip rates are based on the geologic model by Shyu et al. 2016 (Taiwan earthquake model).

## Model Result

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/result.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

Above is an illustration of our model estimation of surface deformation. From left to right are shorterm horizontal, shorterm vertical, and long-term vertical. We are able to capture the deformation pattern well in the horizontal direction, but yet a bit systematic errors in eastern Taiwan and Ilan area. Overall, We get 73.38% variance reduction in the horizontal direction and 64.64% variance reduction for the whole model. Note that we block out the ocean area in these figures because we aren't getting any data in the ocean. Below is an illustration of the standard score comparison of each direction. R-square is relatively high in the horizontal direction even though we increase the weighting in the model. We think it might be because of the significant uncertainty in the vertical GPS data and the uncertainty of the river incision rates.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/11plot.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>


## Model Parameters

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/parm.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

We invert the dip-slip, strike-slip, and locking patch in this study, shown in equation. By finding the max likelihood, we are able to find the best fit of these parameters. Prior bounds on the sense of strike-slip and dip-slip rates are based on the geologic model by Shyu et al. 2016 (Taiwan earthquake model), which means we only control the direction of the slip. We set up a huge range for slip rates, from 0~60 mm/yr, if the sense was documented in the paper. Otherwise, we just let it slip from -60 to 60 mm/yr. The bounds on the detachment are from -150 to 150 mm/yr, which is crazily huge, but the model predicts the maximum rate is around 60 mm/yr.


In the dip-slip result, blue means normal fault, and red is a reverse fault. There are only three normal faults in the model. The dip-slip rate in western Taiwan is ~20mm/yr and ~50 mm/yr in eastern Taiwan. In the strike-slip result, blue means left-lateral, and red means right-lateral. Most of the faults on the western side are left-lateral. White is creeping in the locking patch result, and orange is locking. It's interesting to see that the Chihshang Fault is actually creeping into our inversion.

## Conclusion

We combined present-day vertical and horizontal motions with geologic measurements of uplift rate into a model across the Taiwan mountain belt. The model consists of faults and a detachment embedded in an elastic layer (crust) over an inviscid substrate (mantle). We use present-day and geologic data to invert fault slip rates and interseismic locking areas. The variance reduction of this model is 64%, but the model captures the spatial pattern of deformation well. We build a mode of present-day and long-term rock uplift rates and show that they significantly differ in places. The model shows ~50 mm/yr slip rates in eastern Taiwan and ~20 mm/yr in western Taiwan, and ~60 mm/yr on the detachment. Our model fits better in the horizontal direction, likely due to more significant uncertainty in the vertical GPS data.

## Citation

<p style="text-indent: 0em; margin-top: 10px"><span>Carena, S., Suppe, J., &amp; Kao, H. (2002). Active detachment of Taiwan illuminated by small earthquakes and its control of first-order topography. </span><em><span>Geology</span></em><span>, </span><em><span>30</span></em><span>(10), 935–938. </span><a href='https://doi.org/10.1130/0091-7613(2002)030' target='_blank' class='url'>https://doi.org/10.1130/0091-7613(2002)030</a><a href='http://0935:ADOTIB' target='_blank' class='url'>0935:ADOTIB</a></p>

<p style="text-indent: 0em;"><span>Chen, Y., Chen, K. H., Hu, J. C., &amp; Lee, J. C. (2020). Probing the variation in aseismic slip behavior around an active suture zone: Observations of repeating earthquakes in Eastern Taiwan. </span><em><span>Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth</span></em><span>, </span><em><span>125</span></em><span>, e2019JB018561 </span><a href='https://doi.org/10.1029/2019JB018561' target='_blank' class='url'>https://doi.org/10.1029/2019JB018561</a></p>

<p style="text-indent: 0em;"><span>Ching, K.-E., Hsieh, M.-L., Johnson, K. M., Chen, K.-H., Rau, R.-J., &amp; Yang, M. (2011). Modern vertical deformation rates and mountain building in Taiwan from precise leveling and continuous GPS observations, 2000–2008. </span><em><span>Journal of Geophysical Research</span></em><span>, </span><em><span>116</span></em><span>(B8), B08406.</span><a href='https://doi.org/10.1029/2011JB008242' target='_blank' class='url'>https://doi.org/10.1029/2011JB008242</a></p>

<p style="text-indent: 0em;"><span>Johnson, K. M., Hammond, W. C., Burgette, R. J., Marshall, S. T., &amp; Sorlien, C. C. (2020). Present-day and long-term uplift across the Western Transverse Ranges of Southern California. </span><em><span>Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth</span></em><span>, </span><em><span>125</span></em><span>, e2020JB019672. </span><a href='https://doi.org/10.1029/2020jb019672' target='_blank' class='url'>https://doi.org/10.1029/2020jb019672</a></p>

<p style="text-indent: 0em;"><span>Shyu, J. B. H., Chuang, Y.‐R., Chen, Y.‐L., Lee, Y.‐R., &amp; Cheng, C.‐T. (2016). A new on‐land seismogenic structure source database from the Taiwan Earthquake Model (TEM) project for seismic hazard analysis of Taiwan. </span><em><span>Terrestrial, Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences</span></em><span>, </span><em><span>27</span></em><span>(3), 311–323. </span><a href='https://doi.org/10.3319/TAO.2015.11.27.02(TEM)' target='_blank' class='url'>https://doi.org/10.3319/TAO.2015.11.27.02(TEM)</a></p>

## Poster

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/AGU22.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

## Conference Info

<p style="text-indent: 0em;"><span><a href="https://www.agu.org/fall-meeting-2022" target="_blank">AGU Fall Meeting 2022</a> @McCormick Place Convention Center, poster No. G35B-0323</span></p>

